Discussion 3

I think a major factor in recommender systems must be the perceived bias, for better or for worse. In our last project I had a lot of consideration for user-user systems. In this method I tested cosine similarity using raw and mean-centered cosine similarity to try and test the application of user bias. In my case the movies were hypothetical and the user tendency to rate above or below the user average did not actually prove to be more accurate by RMSE or MAE. This is a low consequence system that may not show as many issues in my context, but I can see many valuable areas where this bias may present a larger human issue. Immediately the places that I find troubling would be social media and the Meetup app discussed in Evan Estola's talk was also a great example. 

First on meetup and the value of some points made in that video. Using gender or race as a collected field can help in prediction accuracy but it will likely lead to some sort of isolation. For an app, this would only be a problem for users but from a societal perspective this can lead to negative outcomes and backlash. Users may end up being further pushed into their user groups by an application whose inital purpose was to provide activities and opportunities to meet new people. I think the proposed solution here of an "ensemble" approach is brilliant as it can effectively be a limiter to prevent overfitting and maintain the real world outcomes aiming to be achieved. Evan discusses the value of real world consequences and certain applications should heavily consider ways to balance the human outcomes that may not always show up in data, but keep users returning and the reputation positive.

Social media is a different situation as the data being used to balance real world outcomes are typically not concerned with overfitting or real world outcomes. Instagram uses features such as click through rate, engagements with posts, watch time, and similar users to push content you are likely to watch. This can have the real world consequence of magnifying ideas that are intrinsically negative or even counterfactual. This has the danger of warping reality based on content and driving users into the same regurgitated "content slop". The issue I see here is that you are maximizing for profitability an the users poor content selection is wholly irrelevant in that goal. On one hand, this is the user's tendencies being fulfilled by showing content that is likely to be viewed or engaged with. The counter to this is the question of pushing misguided, dangerous, or outright false content to new users. This also severely opens the opportunity for bots to be produced and used as a vehicle to push specific ideas by manipulating an algorithm. I think an ensemble approach could still help here but it may take a bit more tactful strategies to truly counter this. My original thought was to counter bots with security and personally created bots to help move and algorithm back towards safer content, but this still raises the question of platform bias and manipulation. An additional solution would be a monitoring AI to engage with popular content and use that to  help flag content based on perceived accuracy and then use this to directly feed back into an ML algorithm as a weighted user in all groups. This is an idea I hope to test in the near future as a guardrail. 
